-> csrf(Cross-Site Request Forgery)

To prevent CSRF attacks, web developers often use CSRF tokens. 
A CSRF token is a unique, random value generated by the server. 
When the form is submitted or the request is made, the server checks that the token matches the expected value.


-> facades

facades provide a convenient way to access Laravel services in your application's code .
a facade is a class that provides access to an object from the container
Now, let's say you need something from the kitchen, but you're in the library. Instead of going all the way to the kitchen, you call a person who can quickly fetch it for you. That person is like a "facade" - they're standing between you and the kitchen, making it easy for you to get what you need without leaving your spot.

-> Eloquent

It is a tool that helps you interact with your database.
With Eloquent, you don't have to write complex SQL queries or manually manage database connections. 
It simplifies database operations and makes working with databases in Laravel a breeze.
I avoid Eloquent when Heavy reporting queries,Joins with aggregations,Large datasets

-> Eloquent relationships

Eloquent relationships make it easier to work with related data in your database, allowing you to fetch, update, and delete related records with ease. They help keep your code organized, maintainable, and expressive, making it simpler to build complex applications with interconnected data.

-> queues

By using queues, you can improve the responsiveness and scalability of your Laravel application, 
ensuring a smooth user experience even when dealing with resource-intensive tasks. 
It allows your application to handle a large number of tasks efficiently and asynchronously, without impacting performance.
php artisan queue:work – Starts the queue worker to process jobs.
php artisan queue:listen – Listens and processes jobs one at a time.
php artisan queue:retry – Retries a failed job (or all failed jobs).
php artisan queue:failed – Lists all failed jobs.
php artisan queue:flush – Clears all failed jobs.
php artisan queue:table – Generates the migration for the queue jobs table.
php artisan queue:monitor – Monitors queue job processing.
Laravel supports multiple queue drivers like Sync, Database, Redis, SQS, and Beanstalkd.
If your app works well with 100 users and still works well with 100,000 users, it is scalable.
If the app crashes or becomes very slow when usage increases, it has poor scalability.

-> Jobs
In Laravel, Jobs allow you to handle background tasks efficiently and asynchronously using Laravel’s queue system. They help in managing resource-intensive operations, improving the performance and responsiveness of your application.
Use Cases for Jobs:
Sending Emails: Use jobs to send emails asynchronously, especially for bulk or marketing emails.
Notifications: Sending push notifications or SMS.
Report Generation: Generating large reports that could take a long time.
Image/Video Processing: Uploading, resizing, or processing media files.
Data Import/Export: Importing/exporting large datasets from CSV or other file formats.

-> Queues vs Jobs

In Laravel, a Job defines what task needs to be done, while a Queue manages when and how that job is executed. Jobs contain the business logic, and Queues provide asynchronous execution, retries, delays, and failure handling. Together, they improve performance, scalability, and user experience.

-> Database Queues

Database queues store jobs in a SQL table.
Database reads/writes happen on disk.
Disk I/O is much slower than memory.

-> Redis Queues

Redis stores data in RAM.
Read/write in microseconds.
No disk wait time.

-> Redis vs Database Queues

Database queues are slow because they rely on disk-based storage, frequent polling, and database locks, which increase latency and load on the database. Redis queues are fast because they operate entirely in memory, use blocking operations instead of polling, and support atomic, lock-free operations, making them highly scalable and suitable for production environments.

Latency is the amount of time it takes for a request to travel from a user (or system) to a server and for the response to start coming back.
In simple terms, it's the delay between an action and the result.
Example
When you tap a button in an app:
The app sends a request to the server.
The server processes it.
The response is sent back.

Frequent polling in a database queue means repeatedly checking a database table at short intervals to see whether new work items (messages, jobs, tasks) have arrived.
Why Frequent Polling Can Be a Problem
If there are no new jobs, the worker still keeps querying the database:
This can lead to:
High database load
Increased CPU usage
Wasted connections
Higher costs
Scalability issues when many workers poll simultaneously

-> Abstract classes

Abstract classes serve as blueprints for other classes. 
They can't be instantiated on their own; instead, other classes must inherit from them. 
Abstract keyword is used to declare abstract class
If a new method is added to abstract class then there is an option of providing implementation.
We must override the abstract method else get CTE.
Abstract class can have constructors.
Example:
abstract class Vehicle
{
    protected $brand;
    public function __construct($brand)
    {
        $this->brand = $brand;
    }
    abstract public function start();
    public function getBrand()
    {
        return $this->brand;
    }
}
class Car extends Vehicle
{
    public function start()
    {
        echo "Car started";
    }
}
Here, all vehicles share the brand property and getBrand() method, but each vehicle must implement start().
Use an abstract class when classes are closely related and should share common code or state. 

-> interface

it is class that contains method which are all abstract.
it is not possible to create an object to an interface.
it is used to achieve loose coupling
It is required to track down all implementation of interface and define it.
It doesnt have constructor.
Use an Interface when:
You need polymorphism
You want to enforce a contract
You are designing APIs or services
You use dependency injection (Laravel, Symfony)
Example:

interface Database
{
connect();
disconnect();
}
class MYsql implements Database
{
connect();
disconnect();
}

class Oracle implements Database
{
connect();
disconnect();
}
class main
{
call
}

Use an interface when you want to define a capability or contract that can be implemented by unrelated classes.

-> What is Tight Coupling?

Tight coupling means a class is strongly dependent on another class and creates or controls it directly.
Any change in one class forces changes in the other.

-> What is Loose Coupling?

Loose coupling means a class depends on abstractions or injected dependencies, not concrete implementations.
Classes can change independently.

-> Overloading 

Method overloading is an example of compile time polymorphism
parameters must be different 
a method can be overloaded in same class or in sub class

-> overriding

Method overriding is an example of run time polymorphism
parameters must be same
a method can be overriden only in sub class

-> traits

Traits in PHP are a way to include methods in classes without using inheritance. 
They allow you to reuse sets of methods in multiple classes. 
Traits are particularly useful when you want to share code between classes that are not necessarily related by inheritance.
I use traits when:
Multiple models need same logic (logging, UUID, audit).
Avoid deep inheritance trees.

Laravel traits are a group of functions that you include within another class. A trait is like an abstract class. You cannot instantiate directly, but its methods can be used in concreate class.

Use a Trait when:
You want to reuse code
Multiple classes share behavior
You want to avoid deep inheritance trees
You want “mixins”
(A mixin in Laravel is a class that contains reusable methods which can be “mixed into” another class at runtime using:
ClassName::mixin(new SomeMixin);)

-> Primary and Unique keyword

There can be only one primary key defined for a table.
A table can have multiple unique keys defined.

Primary keys cannot contain NULL values
unique keys can contain NULL values.

Often used as the target of foreign key relationships.
Also creates an index in most databases.

-> Trigger

It is executed immediately before or after the execution of INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE commands.
12 triggers maximum number of triggers, you can apply on a single table.

-> Stored Procedure

It is a block which performs one or more specific function.
it can be nested invoked and parameterized.
you can create sp once store in db and call it n number of times in program

-> Stored function

The function return a value but in SP it is optional
Function can have only i/p paramenters but in SP both i/p and o/p parameters.
Functions can be called from procedure but procedures cannot be called from procedure.
we cannot use SP in sql stmt like select insert but can use in function
we can use try catch exception handling in sp but cannot do in function
we can use transaction in SP but not in function

-> Final class

It cannot be extended or changed by class.
It's typically used when you want to prevent any further modifications to a class.

-> Final method

it can't be overridden or changed by any subclass. 
It's typically used when you want to prevent subclasses from accidentally changing the behavior of a critical method

-> namespaces

In Laravel, namespaces are used extensively to organize and structure code within the framework.
 By default, controllers are located within the App\Http\Controllers namespace, while middleware resides in the App\Http\Middleware namespace.
 
 -> static methods
 
 you can use without creating an instance of a class.
 static methods are useful for operations that don't depend on the specific state of an object
<?php
class MathHelper {
    // Static method
    public static function add($a, $b) {
        return $a + $b;
    }
}

echo MathHelper::add(10, 20); // Output: 30
?>

Why static?
Addition doesn’t depend on any object state, just input parameters.
No need to instantiate MathHelper.

-> Composer

Composer is a dependency manager for PHP. It simplifies the process of managing libraries and packages that your PHP project depends on.

-> Rest api methods

GET,PUT,POST,PATCH,DELETE

-> Features of eloquent orm

Model-Driven Approach
CRUD Operations
Relationships
Query Builder
Automatic Timestamps
Soft Deletes
Mass Assignment Protection
Eager Loading
Scopes
Events and Observers

-> Routing

Routing is like a roadmap for web applications.
It's like telling the application where to go based on the URL requested by the user.
Laravel’s routing allows you to map URLs to specific controllers or actions. Routes are defined in routes/web.php for web routes and routes/api.php for API routes.

-> Reverse routing in Laravel.

Reverse routing is a method of generating URL based on symbol or name. It makes your Laravel application flexible.
In simple terms, reverse routing allows you to generate URLs dynamically based on route names or other parameters, rather than manually specifying them in your code. This makes your application more flexible and maintainable, especially when route URLs change. 

-> service providers

In Laravel, service providers are responsible for binding services into the Laravel service container, registering event listeners, defining routes, and performing any other necessary bootstrapping operations for your application.
In Laravel, bootstrapping refers to the process of preparing and initializing various components of the framework to get the application ready to handle requests. 

-> dependency injection

It is a technique in which one object is dependent on another object. There are three types of dependency injection: 1) Constructor injection, 2) setter injection, and 3) interface injection.

Dependency Injection is a design pattern where a class receives its dependencies from the outside instead of creating them internally.
Dependency = any object or service your class needs to work.
Helps in making code loosely coupled, testable, and maintainable.

Without DI (tightly coupled):

<?php
class Logger {
    public function log($msg) {
        echo $msg;
    }
}

class User {
    private $logger;

    public function __construct() {
        $this->logger = new Logger(); // tightly coupled
    }

    public function create() {
        $this->logger->log("User created");
    }
}

Problem: You cannot change Logger easily or mock it for testing.

With DI (loosely coupled):

<?php
class Logger {
    public function log($msg) {
        echo $msg;
    }
}

class User {
    private $logger;
    public function __construct(Logger $logger) {
        $this->logger = $logger;
    }
    public function create() {
        $this->logger->log("User created");
    }
}

// Pass dependency from outside
$logger = new Logger();
$user = new User($logger);
$user->create();

Advantages:
Loosely coupled
Easier to unit test
Flexible (you can inject different implementations)

-> Types of Dependency Injection

1. Constructor Injection (most common)

Dependencies are provided via the class constructor.
Example:

class User {
    private $logger;
    public function __construct(Logger $logger) {
        $this->logger = $logger;
    }
}

2. Setter Injection

Dependencies are provided via a setter method.
Example:

class User {
    private $logger;

    public function setLogger(Logger $logger) {
        $this->logger = $logger;
    }
}
$logger = new Logger();
$user = new User();
$user->setLogger($logger);

3. Interface Injection

The dependency is injected via an interface method that the class must implement.
Less common in PHP, but used in some frameworks.

interface LoggerAware {
    public function setLogger(Logger $logger);
}

class User implements LoggerAware {
    private $logger;
    public function setLogger(Logger $logger) {
        $this->logger = $logger;
    }
}

Conclusion

Dependency Injection is a design pattern where a class receives its dependencies from outside rather than creating them internally.
This makes the code loosely coupled, easier to test, and maintainable.
There are three main types:

1. Constructor Injection – dependencies passed through the constructor.
2. Setter Injection – dependencies passed through setter methods.
3. Interface Injection – class implements an interface to receive dependencies.

Simple Analogy
Imagine a Car needs an Engine.
Without DI: The Car creates its own Engine.
With DI: Someone provides the Engine to the Car from outside.
This makes it easy to replace a petrol engine with an electric engine without changing the Car class.

-> What is a Service Container?
A Service Container is a central registry where you can register various services (like database connections, email services, etc.), and when you need a service, you can simply ask the container to resolve it, and it will take care of instantiating the service, injecting dependencies, and managing its lifecycle.
It’s responsible for resolving classes and injecting their dependencies.

-> Authentication Frontline in Laravel
In Laravel, the authentication frontend typically involves the following components:
User Login
Registration
Password Reset
Two-Factor Authentication (2FA) (Optional)
User Authorization
User Profile Management

-> Rate Limit
In Laravel, Rate Limiting is used to restrict the number of requests that a user or client can make to an API or web application in a given time frame. This is important to prevent abuse, ensure fair usage, and protect your application from overloading.

-> Throttling
Throttling controls the request speed by slowing down responses instead of blocking them.
Rate Limiting → You can enter the room only 5 times per hour.
Throttling → You can enter more times, but you must walk slower.

-> Constructor and Destructor
Constructor is used to initialize an object, while Destructor is used for cleanup.
Constructor is invoked when an object is created, while Destructor is invoked when an object is destroyed.
Constructor can accept parameters to set initial values for object properties while Destructor does not accept parameters.

-> How Does the Client Know About the Session If It Is Stored on the Server?
The client (browser) knows about the session through a session ID, which is stored in a cookie or passed in the URL. The server uses this session ID to retrieve session data.
By Default: In a cookie (PHPSESSID in PHP, laravel_session in Laravel).
Alternative: Passed in the URL (?session_id=abc123), but this is less secure.

-> What Happens When You Hit google.com?  

When you type google.com in a browser and press Enter, several steps occur behind the scenes:

1. Browser Checks Cache
The browser first checks if it has a cached copy of the Google homepage.
If found, it loads it from cache; otherwise, it proceeds to the next step.

2. DNS Resolution (Converting google.com to IP Address)
Your browser asks the DNS server to resolve google.com into an IP address.
Google’s servers have multiple IPs (e.g., 142.250.182.14).
If cached, the DNS lookup is skipped.

3. Establishing a Connection
Your browser establishes a TCP connection with Google's server using HTTPS (port 443).
A TLS handshake occurs for encryption and security.

4. Sending an HTTP Request
Your browser sends an HTTP GET request to Google:
http
GET / HTTP/1.1
Host: google.com
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0; Win64; x64)

5. Google's Server Processes the Request
Google's load balancer determines the best data center to handle your request.
Google’s backend generates the HTML page dynamically.

6. Server Sends an HTTP Response
Google’s server responds with an HTTP 200 OK and the homepage content:
http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/html
The response includes HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

7. Browser Renders the Page
The browser parses HTML and makes additional requests for:
CSS (for styling)
JavaScript (for interactivity)
Images (logos, icons)
The browser renders the final page.

8. Google Tracks Your Visit
Google’s analytics tools track user activity.
Cookies, caching, and personalization may be applied.

9. Interactive Features Load
Google loads JavaScript-powered features like Google Search suggestions.

When we type google.com, the browser resolves the domain via DNS, establishes a TCP connection, performs an SSL handshake for HTTPS, sends an HTTP request, receives a response from Google’s servers, and finally renders the page by parsing HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
TCP meaning Transmission Control Protocol, is a communications standard for delivering data and messages through networks.
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) is an older security protocol for encrypting internet traffic, now largely replaced by its successor, TLS (Transport Layer Security), but the term "SSL" is still commonly used; it secures data between a browser and server (HTTPS), authenticates the server, and protects sensitive info like passwords by using certificates and public/private keys, creating a secure, trusted connection. 

When I enter google.com, the browser first checks caches for the IP address. If not found, it performs DNS resolution to get Google's IP. Then it establishes a TCP connection using a three-way handshake and performs a TLS handshake for HTTPS security. The browser sends an HTTP request, which reaches Google's load balancer and then a web server. The server processes the request and returns HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Finally, the browser parses these resources, builds the DOM and render tree, and renders the page on the screen.

-> What is an OPTIONS Request?
An OPTIONS request is an HTTP method used by clients (e.g., browsers) to determine the communication options available for a resource on a server. It is mainly used in CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing) and API interactions.
When a client (like a browser) makes an OPTIONS request, the server responds with allowed HTTP methods and headers for that resource.
Why is OPTIONS Used?
1. CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing)
If an API is called from a different domain, the browser first sends an OPTIONS request (Preflight request).
The server responds with allowed methods, headers, and origins.
2. Checking API Capabilities
Clients can check which HTTP methods (GET, POST, DELETE, etc.) are supported before sending a real request.
3. Security
Prevents unauthorized access by allowing only specific origins and headers.

-> Pointers in C
A pointer in C is a variable that stores the memory address of another variable. Instead of holding data directly, a pointer holds the location of the data in memory. Understanding pointers is crucial for efficient memory management and for working with dynamic memory, arrays, and structures in C.

-> Pass by Value and Refrence
Pass by Value is typically used when you don’t want the function to modify the original data. It’s simpler and safer because the function works with a copy of the data.
Pass by Reference is used when you want the function to modify the original data or when you want to save memory (e.g., with large structures or arrays) by not copying the data.

-> Multithreading in C
Multithreading is a technique used in programming where multiple threads (smaller units of a process) run independently but share the same resources (e.g., memory). Multithreading allows a program to perform multiple tasks concurrently, which can lead to better performance, especially on multi-core processors.

In C, multithreading is not natively supported, but it can be achieved using pthreads (POSIX threads) or platform-specific libraries like Windows threads.

Basic Concepts of Multithreading
Thread: A thread is a basic unit of execution within a process. Each thread shares the same memory space but has its own stack.
Concurrency: The ability of a system to run multiple tasks at the same time. This does not necessarily mean tasks are running simultaneously but rather in overlapping time periods.
Parallelism: The actual simultaneous execution of multiple threads on multiple CPU cores.
Context Switching: The operating system's method of switching between threads.

A multithreading is a process of executing multiple threads simultaneously.

Advantages:
(1)It doesn't block the user because threads are independent and you can perform multiple operations at the same time.
(2)you can perform many operations together so it saves time.
(3)Threads are independent so it doesnt affect other threads if an exception occurs in a single thread.

-> Resource Collection
A Resource Collection in Laravel is a powerful tool for transforming collections of data into a structured json response. It simplifies API development by allowing you to customize how collections are returned, including pagination and nested relationships. It’s an essential feature when building APIs that require consistent, clean, and reusable responses.
Resource Collections keep API responses consistent, prevent sensitive data from being exposed, and separate formatting logic from business logic, making the code cleaner and safer.

-> PDO
PDO stands for PHP Data Objects.  
PDO allows developers to connect to a database, execute queries, and retrieve results, all without relying on specific database extensions.
PDO supports prepared statements, which are an important feature for security and performance.
Prepared statements help prevent SQL injection attacks by separating SQL code from user input. The SQL query is first prepared, and then the user input is bound to the placeholders in the query.
It allows you to group multiple SQL queries into a single transaction.
It supports prepared statements, multiple database drivers, and secure database interactions.
Why Use PDO?
Supports multiple database systems.
Uses prepared statements to help prevent SQL injection.
Provides a clean object-oriented API.
Makes switching databases easier.

What are some common security vulnerabilities in PHP applications, and how would you mitigate them in your framework?

SQL Injection: Use prepared statements and parameterized queries (e.g., PDO).
Cross-Site Scripting (XSS): Escape user input with functions like htmlspecialchars().
Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF): Implement token-based validation for forms.
Session Hijacking: Use secure, HttpOnly cookies and regenerate session IDs after login.

How would you implement authentication and authorization in a custom PHP framework?

Authentication verifies the identity of a user, while authorization determines what resources they can access. Implement an authentication system using sessions or JWT, and implement role-based access control (RBAC) for authorization.

What techniques would you use to optimize a PHP application for better performance?

Opcode Caching: Use `OPcache` to store precompiled PHP bytecode in memory.
Caching: Implement object caching (Memcached, Redis) and page caching.
Minification: Minify CSS, JavaScript, and HTML files.
Database Optimization: Use indexes, optimized queries, and connection pooling.
Lazy Loading: Only load dependencies when they are required.

What is Laravel?

Laravel is a PHP web application framework designed to make developing web applications easier, faster, and more enjoyable by providing a clean and elegant syntax. It follows theModel-View-Controller (MVC) architecture pattern and offers a variety of built-in tools and features that simplify common tasks such as routing, authentication, database management, caching, and more.

Key Features of Laravel:
1.MVC Architecture: Laravel uses the Model-View-Controller pattern, which helps in organizing code by separating the application logic (Model), presentation layer (View), and user input (Controller).

2.Eloquent ORM: Laravel'sEloquent ORM (Object-Relational Mapping) is an elegant and simple ActiveRecord implementation for working with databases. It allows developers to interact with database tables as if they were simple PHP objects, making database operations more intuitive.

3.Blade Templating Engine: Blade is Laravel's built-in templating engine that allows you to write dynamic HTML while keeping your code clean and simple. It provides features like template inheritance, control structures, and data rendering.

4.Routing: Laravel provides a simple and powerful routing system that allows you to define the URLs of your application and map them to controller actions or closures.

5.Middleware: Middleware in Laravel is used for filtering HTTP requests entering the application, such as authentication, logging, and CORS handling.

6.Authentication & Authorization: Laravel comes with built-in authentication features, allowing developers to easily implement login, registration, password reset, and access control.

7.Artisan Command-Line Interface: Laravel includesArtisan, a powerful command-line tool that helps automate repetitive tasks, such as database migrations, testing, and generating code templates (controllers, models, etc.).

8.Migration and Schema Builder: Laravel includes a schema builder and migration system that makes it easy to manage and version control your database schema, as well as roll back and modify the database structure.

9.Queue and Job System: Laravel provides a unified API for interacting with different queue systems, allowing tasks like sending emails or processing images to be deferred and processed in the background.

10.Testing: Laravel has built-in support for unit testing with PHPUnit and provides a robust testing suite, including testing for database, authentication, validation, etc.

11.RESTful API Development: Laravel makes it easy to build RESTful APIs with features like route grouping, middleware, and API rate limiting.

12.Package Ecosystem: Laravel has a rich ecosystem of packages and extensions that can be easily integrated into applications, such asLaravel Passport (OAuth2 server),Laravel Nova (Admin Panel), andLaravel Cashier (subscription billing).

What is the difference between static and non-static methods/properties in PHP?

Static members belong to the class and can be accessed using ClassName::member without creating an object. Non-static members belong to an object and require object instantiation. Static methods cannot use $this, while non-static methods can access object properties through $this.

What is HTTP middleware?

HTTP middleware is a technique for filtering HTTP requests. Laravel includes a middleware that checks whether application user is authenticated or not.

Multiple interface inheritance(If A class implement multiple interfaces)
Multiple inheritance not allowed because it leads to deadly diamond problem.
it is an ambiguity that arises when 2 class B and C inherit from super class Avg
and another class D inherit from both B and C

Difference between interface and abstract class?
Interface defines only method signatures.
Abstract class can have both methods and implementation.